# I18n

There are two kind of resources that are localizable.

* Text in UI like: Map, About, Support, etc.
* Some data of facilities: services names.

The application is configured with a list of enabled locales
that are displayed to the end user.

The current locale is selected by a query string, cookie, browser accepted languages or default application locale.

## Adding new localization

Let's suppose we want to add a new `fr` locale. The following steps should be performed:

* Create a `config/locales/fr.yml` with the translated content from `config/locales/en.yml`
* Ensure the dataset is enhanced with the `fr` locale. This means that a `name:fr` column should be present at `data/input/services.csv`. Check in [importing data](importing.md) for more information.
* Import the dataset.
* Enable the `fr` locale by changing the `settings.yml` or the `SETTINGS__LOCALES__FR=French` environment variable.

```
# file: config/settings.yml
# ...
default_locale: en
locales:
  en: English
  fr: Français
```

The `config/locales/*.yml` are translated to javascript thanks to [i18n-js gem](https://github.com/fnando/i18n-js). So upon deployment a new version of assets will be generated with this resources.

## Troubleshooting 

In addition to `settings.yml` file, you can also add locales in other files: `settings.local.yml` will affect both `dev` and `test` environments, while `settings/development.yml` and `settings/test.yml` will affect their respective environments only. 

If you're currently working with a dataset that supports, let's say English and French, you should disable references to Spanish locale (`es`) in both `settings.local.yml` and `settings/development.yml`. Otherwise, you'll receive the following error when triggering an import from the UI:

```
/src/app/models/indexing.rb:line_number:in `block in validate_category_group_translations': Missing translation (RuntimeError)
```

Likewise, if `ElasticsearchService` specs are failing due to:

```
Failure/Error: raise "Missing translation"

RuntimeError:
  Missing translation
```

You can remove the conflicting locale from either `settings/test.yml` or `settings.local.yml`.

Locales are managed by [Spring](https://github.com/rails/spring). After modifying any of these files, you have to stop the service to force changes to take effect:

```
bin/spring stop 
```
